UDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
on to New Hampshire.
Presidential candidates
face high stakes in next week's
primary after
Iowa voters hand a surprising
victory to Ted
Cruz and a slim win to Hillary
Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Wednesday: Is
Oklahoma's free pre-kindergarten
program worth
the cost?
WILLIAM GORMLEY, Georgetown
University: In
Tulsa, the single best predictor
of a child's
verbal test skills is not race,
or income,
but whether that child was in
pre-K the previous
year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And looking into
The New York
Times' archives of
never-before-published
photographs in black history.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Results from the
2016 Iowa caucuses
are finally official.
Republicans wrapped
up their race last night. And,
today, Democrat
Hillary Clinton finally squeaked
out a win
of less than three-tenths of a
percent. By
then, the candidates had lit out
for New England.
New day, new battleground. The
candidates
have already moved on to the
Granite State.
At a rally today in Keene,
Democrat Bernie
Sanders declared his strong
showing at the
Iowa caucuses was a clear
turning point.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Last night, we began the
political revolution,
not just in Iowa, not just in
New Hampshire,
but all over this country.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: But although the
latest polls
show the Vermont senator well
ahead, it was
Hillary Clinton who won the
state in 2008.
Today, in Nashua, she kicked off
her effort
to score a repeat victory.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
It is great to be here with all
of you, and
I am so thrilled that I am
coming to New Hampshire
after winning Iowa.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: With last night's
razor-thin Iowa
win made official only at
midday, Clinton
made her case to loyal
supporters and cable
news audiences.
The top three finishers in
Iowa's Republican
caucuses also returned to New
Hampshire today.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
God bless the great state of New
Hampshire.
GWEN IFILL: Ted Cruz, who swept
past both
Donald Trump and Marco Rubio,
said he is convinced
he can duplicate his Iowa
success in New Hampshire.
SEN. TED CRUZ: Both states take
your responsibility
seriously. There are millions of
Americans
who are counting on each and
every one of
you to vet the candidates, not
to listen to
the empty talk, not to listen to
the campaign
promises, but instead to look us
in the eye,
and determine who's telling
truth and who's
blowing smoke.
GWEN IFILL: Second-place Donald
Trump said
in tweets he had not been given
credit for
what he accomplished in Iowa. He
begins his
swing in New Hampshire with a
rally this evening.
Marco Rubio, whose strong third
exceeded expectations,
hit the ground this morning,
trying to turn
these Manchester breakfast
diners into supporters.
He told reporters, last night
was proof that
his message had appeal.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
I can grow the conservative
movement. I can
take our message to people who
have not voted
for us before, and bring them on
and into
the conservative movement, and
that means
we win the election and we win
the future.
SEN. TIM SCOTT (R), South
Carolina: Join me.
Vote for Marco Rubio.
GWEN IFILL: The Florida senator
also rolled
out the endorsement of South
Carolina Senator
Tim Scott, whose state holds the
third GOP
nominating contest two Saturdays
from now.
Three other so-called
establishment candidates
got a head start stumping in the
state. John
Kasich has been there since the
weekend, and
Jeb Bush made the trip even
before Iowans
started caucusing.
So did Chris Christie. At a town
hall today,
he took aim at both Cruz and
Rubio.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
Worse yet, what if we won with
someone who
wasn't ready to be president?
GWEN IFILL: It's a sign that,
for those candidates
who've staked their campaigns on
the New Hampshire
primary, this could be yet
another make-or-break
week.
We will have a full analysis of
where the
presidential race stands now
after the news
summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street took
another beating
today as oil fell back below $30
a barrel,
and Chevron and ExxonMobil
turned in their
worst quarters since 2002. The
Dow Jones industrial
average lost 295 points to close
at 16153.
The Nasdaq fell more than 100
points, and
the S&P 500 dropped 36.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama held
a relatively
rare meeting with the top House
and Senate
Republicans today, but it's not
clear they
accomplished much. The White
House hoped to
lay out a bipartisan agenda.
But, beforehand, even as he
spoke of cooperation,
House Speaker Paul Ryan said
he's glad that
-- quote -- "The days of Barack
Obama's presidency
are numbered."
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
We get along with each other
personally. We
agree to disagree on these
things, and so
we will put those disagreements
in check,
see where the common ground is,
go act on
that common ground to get some
things done.
And then on the big issues that
we don't agree,
we believe we have an obligation
to our constituents
and our fellow citizens to offer
alternatives,
and that's what we're going to
be doing this
year.
GWEN IFILL: Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell
said the two sides can work on
stopping the
heroin epidemic and containing
the Zika virus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Iraq, there's
word that
thousands of civilians trapped
inside Fallujah
are running out of food and
basic medicine.
The governor of Anbar province
appealed today
for the U.S. coalition to
airdrop humanitarian
aid into the city. Security
forces are trying
to retake Fallujah from Islamic
State militants.
GWEN IFILL: Talks aimed at
ending Syria's
civil war appeared to sputter in
Geneva today.
The Syrian government refused to
meet with
the opposition, and the rebels
condemned a
government offensive near
Aleppo, Syria's
largest city. The assault, aided
by Russian
airstrikes, captured a village
north of Aleppo.
Advances by government troops
are now threatening
rebel supply lines there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The top American
commander
in Afghanistan is warning the
U.S. needs to
make a longer-term commitment.
At a House
hearing today, Army General John
Campbell
said that Afghan forces are
plagued by poor
leadership.
GEN. JOHN CAMPBELL, Commander of
U.S. Forces
in Afghanistan: Now more than
ever, the United
States shouldn't waver on
Afghanistan. Afghanistan
is at an inflection point. I
believe, if we
do not make deliberate, measured
adjustments,
2016 is at risk of being no
better and possibly
worse than 2015.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama's
current plan
calls for cutting U.S. troop
numbers in Afghanistan
from 9,800 to 5,500 before he
leaves office.
GWEN IFILL: The top Marine and
Army generals
called today for women to
register for the
draft. The secretaries of the
Navy and the
Air Force declined to go that
far. All four
spoke at a Senate hearing on the
Pentagon
decision to open all combat
roles to women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nine more
migrants have drowned
off Western Turkey, in rough
winter seas as
they tried to reach Greece. And
the International
Organization for Migration
announced today
that more than 360 people died
in the attempt
last month. The IOM also
reported more than
62,000 migrants managed to make
it to Europe
in January. About one-third were
children
traveling alone.
GWEN IFILL: A winter storm
brought here new
dangers across much of the U.S.
today, from
New Mexico to Michigan, with
blizzard warnings,
tornado alerts and more. In
Iowa, the snow
came a day after the Democratic
and Republican
caucuses. Roads were so slick in
some places
that even the snowplows had
trouble making
their way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There might be
some good news
for the winter-weary on this
Groundhog Day.
The human handlers of
Punxsutawney Phil say
that Pennsylvania's most famous
furry rodent
failed to see his shadow this
morning. That's
supposed to mean an early
spring. Groundhogs
in New York, Georgia and
Wisconsin agreed,
but two in Michigan and Ohio
forecast six
more weeks of winter.
So, who do we believe?
GWEN IFILL: We don't believe any
of them.
I'm very skeptical about this.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
high stakes
get higher ahead of New
Hampshire's primary;
the U.S. moves to squash a
growing Isis threat
in Libya; another major city's
police force
goes under review; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Iowa caucuses
are now part
of history, and the eyes of the
political
world turn to the Granite State.
Susan Page is Washington bureau
chief for
USA Today, and she joins us from
Manchester,
New Hampshire. And Reid Wilson
is chief political
correspondent for the politics
and polling
Web site Morning Consult.
And we welcome you both to the
program.
So, let's talk about how this
race changes
now that Iowa's behind us,
Democrats first.
And, Susan, let me start with
you.
Who -- does anybody have an
advantage coming
out of Iowa, because you have
got this virtual
tie between Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Yes, you know, you do have a
virtual tie,
but at her very first event in
New Hampshire
this morning, Hillary Clinton
described herself
as a winner, said she had won
there and lost
there, and it was better to win.
So, you may just win by one
point, but in
the Clinton campaign's view, a
win is a win
is a win. And I suppose that's
helpful. On
the other hand, also a boost for
Sanders supporters.
I mean, as Senator Sanders
pointed out, a
couple weeks ago, you could not
have predicted
that he would basically have
gone head to
head with Hillary Clinton and
tied her in
Iowa.
So I think both campaigns came
out of Iowa
with some bragging rights.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would you see
that the same
way, Reid?
REID WILSON, Morning Consult: I
do. I think
both campaigns had a relatively
good night.
But the results we saw forecast
some challenges
in the future.
Bernie Sanders is going to have
to branch
out and expand his base,
especially among
more traditional Democrats.
Hillary Clinton
is going to have to find a way
to tap into
some of the youthful excitement
that Sanders
is generating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk,
Reid, about
Bernie Sanders. And you're
saying he's got
to branch out, but right now he
has got a
lead in New Hampshire. So, how
does that translate
there and then on into South
Carolina?
REID WILSON: Neighbors of New
Hampshire, whether
they're from Massachusetts or
Vermont, have
traditionally done very well in
New Hampshire
primaries.
But, beyond that, we have
essentially dealt
with the two states in the early
nominating
contests that are the whitest,
that are the
most likely to vote for Sanders.
And then
down the road, we get into
populations in
South Carolina and Nevada,
heavily Hispanic,
heavily African-American, both
of whom are
groups among whom Hillary
Clinton does exceedingly
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, how do you
see the challenges
that Bernie Sanders now
confronts?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, Bernie Sanders
would like
to win big in New Hampshire next
week. There's
nothing like a victory to put
wind in your
sails.
But I totally agree with Reid.
He then faces
a big problem when he goes to
Nevada, with
its big Hispanic population,
South Carolina,
with its big African-American
population,
groups with whom the Clintons
have a long
history and a lot of support.
The Clinton campaign thinks,
even if they
lose in New Hampshire, which is
the most likely
scenario, she can go to South
Carolina and
then into the Southern states on
Super Tuesday
and have a kind of firewall,
where she's guaranteed
to beat Bernie Sanders, because
he has not
yet managed no get significant
support among
African-Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Susan, how
do you see
Hillary Clinton's principal
challenge right
now?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, here's the
questions that
I think some Democrats have
about Hillary
Clinton: Was this just kind of a
little glitch,
that a combination of
circumstances that made
Iowa so close, or is there
something flawed
about her as a candidate that is
going to
create problems down the road in
other states
where she ought to do well?
And I don't think we can know
that for sure
until she faces those contests
in other states.
It may just be that first two
states are really
hard for Hillary Clinton. It may
be that they're
seeing signs that she's not a
great candidate.
And how do they fix that when
they're down
to two candidates and the other
one is a candidate
who is basically not as
acceptable to the
Democratic establishment?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's turn to the
Republicans.
Reid Wilson, Ted Cruz clearly
got a lift coming
out of Iowa. Where does that
take him? What
does that mean for him?
REID WILSON: That puts him on a
relatively
sound path to the nomination. It
is a better
path than, I think, a lot of
other candidates
have. Ted Cruz really needed to
win Iowa.
If he hadn't won, his campaign
likely would
have collapsed, because he's
going to face
some serious challenges in New
Hampshire,
where voters are a lot more
centrist.
And then moving forward,
assuming that New
Hampshire condenses the rest of
the Republican
field, it will essentially be a
three-way
race between whatever
establishment candidate
comes out of New Hampshire,
Donald Trump,
and Ted Cruz. He's going to need
as much momentum
as he can possibly get. And he
got a big lift
by beating expectations on
Monday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Susan, how do you see the job
that Ted Cruz
has now, and who, what -- and
what is his
big competition now?
SUSAN PAGE: You know what's
amazing is, we're
talking about Ted Cruz, and we
didn't first
talk about Donald Trump. I don't
think that's
happened in the past six months
when we have
talked about the Republican
field.
And that tells you what a big
victory that
was for Ted Cruz last night.
Really, he was
-- he had been criticized by the
popular Republican
governor of Iowa, Terry
Branstad. He had come
out against ethanol subsidies.
That's like
sacred ground when it comes to
Iowa. And he
still managed to win there, big
victory.
But he still faces Donald Trump,
and we don't
know yet whether Donald Trump
can take a punch.
Donald Trump has had this
phenomenal rise
since he announced his
candidacy, rising in
the polls, becoming more and
more acceptable
to more and more Republicans.
The question
was, could he deliver when
people actually
had to go and vote? And he
didn't do that
last night.
Will he pick himself up and go
on in states
like New Hampshire to come back?
That, we
don't know yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
what Donald
Trump needs to do now, Reid?
REID WILSON: The aura of
inevitability is
no longer with Donald Trump. His
whole brand
is about winning and success.
And, as Susan mentioned, the
first time he
had an opportunity to actually
convert, he
didn't. So, Trump really needs
some kind of
rebound, whether it's in New
Hampshire or
South Carolina, but he needs to
get back on
the horse, and quickly.
Otherwise, his -- this
sort of notion that he is the
inevitable candidate,
if that's not sustainable, then
he's not going
to go anywhere.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, quickly,
Susan, to Marco
Rubio, who came in a really
strong third,
but there are a lot of -- and
there are a
lot of other candidates who
would love to
trade places with his being
third.
SUSAN PAGE: Yes, that's right.
That was a strong finish, and he
actually
handled it pretty masterfully
when you think
about a third-place finish as
being a victory,
but I think it was for Marco
Rubio, because,
going into New Hampshire, it
puts him a bit
above those three governors. All
of the -- all
four of those candidates are
trying to get
the mantle of the mainstream
Republican, the
alternative to Donald Trump and
Ted Cruz.
Iowa gave Marco Rubio a big
boost to that
status.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Reid, we
see, picking
up on what Susan just said,
these other Republican,
so-called establishment
Republicans are already
going after him today. Chris
Christie said
he's like the boy in the plastic
bubble?
REID WILSON: Yes, and we have
seen a lot of
different candidates go after
Marco Rubio,
whether it's Jeb Bush or John
Kasich or today
Chris Christie.
And that's because of this sort
of traffic
jam that we're seeing in New
Hampshire. New
Hampshire is the state where the
establishment
Republicans tend to dominate
Republican politics
and the Republican primaries.
But you have
got about five candidates who
have a legitimate
shot and are really trying to
compete in New
Hampshire.
That sort of gives me the sense
that someone
like a Donald Trump or maybe
even a Ted Cruz
could sneak out a win, because
their slice
of the Republican pie isn't as
divided as
that establishment lane.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have a
little bit
of clarification, but there is a
whole long
way to go.
Reid Wilson, Susan Page, great
to see both
of you. Thank you.
REID WILSON: Thanks a lot.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: And so we turn now
to two top
advisers to last night's
winners.
First up, Cruz campaign
spokesman Rick Tyler.
He joins us from New Hampshire.
So, Rick, in a nutshell, you
managed to turn
around expectations, as we just
heard them
say, and come out with a big
victory in Iowa
last night. How did that happen?
RICK TYLER, Spokesman, Ted Cruz
Campaign:
It took a lot of hard work and a
lot of time,
a great team in Iowa that put
together a -- what
really was a traditional ground
game, but
it was driven by data.
We just had an exceptional
candidate who has
an exceptional message, and that
people are
sick and tired of Washington and
they want
a change. And Ted Cruz is the
only candidate
who has shown that he's willing
to go to Washington
and stand up to the
establishment, and even
stand up to members of his own
party, and
he's built a reputation on that.
And so we have seen everybody
has -- all the
Americans are really looking
toward the outsiders,
but Ted Cruz is really the
original outsider,
the proven outsider. And so when
we went to
look for supporters and
volunteers to help,
it was like they were waiting to
be found.
So we ended up with 12,000
volunteers in Iowa,
and we had them doing stuff
every day. We
were knocking on 2,000 doors a
day, making
over 20,000 phone calls a day.
And people
were really excited to be part
of it.
GWEN IFILL: And many of them
were evangelicals,
who obviously make up a big part
of the caucusing
vote in Iowa. But you don't have
that same
demographic in New Hampshire.
How do you plan
to pull the rabbit out of the
hat a second
time?
RICK TYLER: You know, I think
one of the best
headlines I read was actually
here in New
Hampshire that said, "Ted Cruz
brings religious
message to secular New
Hampshire, and it's
working."
And it's part of what I heard
Reid say, is
that there's five people
basically competing
for the moderate vote, and Ted
Cruz has a
real opportunity with the
conservatives here,
and not just evangelicals, but
the pro-life
conservatives, pro-family
conservatives, pro-gun
conservatives, and pro-growth
conservatives.
They have all formed something
called the
603 Alliance. And they have all
gotten behind
Ted Cruz. And when conservatives
come together
and the rest of the field is
fractured -- and,
by the way, it's usually the
other way around.
The establishment has one
well-funded candidate,
and the conservative has a lot
with no money.
This time, we're the well-funded
candidate,
and the establishment, there's a
lot of them,
and they don't have the money.
So, we're very
well-positioned. I'm not
predicting a win
here in New Hampshire, but we're
going to
fight hard here.
GWEN IFILL: I didn't expect you
would.
So you're saying that if, say,
John Kasich,
Chris Christie and Jeb Bush
divide the establishment
support, and maybe a little bit
of Donald
Trump as well, that allows you
to sneak in
through the middle?
RICK TYLER: I think that's
right.
And we saw today, even today, as
you saw with
Chris Christie, who is calling
Marco Rubio
the boy in the bubble because he
doesn't often
take press questions and is a
little bit standoffish
with the press.
And so, look, they can --
they're -- for most
of them, it's do-or-die. Our
expectations
here are rather low. And we will
go on the
South Carolina. And then you
have the SEC
primary, where you have all
these states from
South Carolina to Georgia to
Tennessee, Oklahoma,
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana,
and Texas.
These are all 50-percent-plus
evangelical
states.
So, you have 11 of them total
that will go
before March 15. And they favor
Ted Cruz.
And so if you're running against
Ted Cruz,
it's going to be a gauntlet to
go through
with all that support that we
have now proven
we can get.
GWEN IFILL: So, it sounds, to
you, it's OK
if you come in second or third
in New Hampshire,
as long as you have that long
game headed
toward the South in mind?
RICK TYLER: I would be thrilled
with second
place in New Hampshire. And I
would -- and
third would certainly be
acceptable.
GWEN IFILL: OK, Rick, I just
helped you set
your expectations lower. So, you
can say thank
you.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Thank you so much
for joining
us tonight.
RICK TYLER: Appreciate it, Gwen.
Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Now turning to the
Democrats'
side, we're joined by Joel
Benenson, chief
strategist for the Hillary
Clinton campaign.
Joel, I'm going to ask you the
same question
I just asked Rick Tyler, which
is, in a nutshell,
how did you pull it out, very
narrow win in
Iowa?
JOEL BENENSON, Chief Strategist,
Hillary Clinton
Campaign: Well, I think we
pulled it out with
a really strong message.
I think Hillary Clinton was
really closing
very strongly talking about the
need and the
choice to elect a president who
can make real
progress, who can make a real
difference in
their lives and get things done.
And I think then we had a ground
game that
was great. You know, all going
into this caucus
in Iowa, the Sanders campaign
had predicted
they were going to win. They
said if the turnout
was higher than 170,000, that
would be their
turnout. And they got that
turnout. And it
turned out that that was good
for Hillary
Clinton.
A lot of talk about enthusiasm
and energy
on the Sanders side of things,
but what we
learned last night is that there
was a lot
of enthusiasm and energy for
Hillary Clinton
and her candidacy and her
message of being
the progressive who likes to get
things done
and who will make a real
difference in people's
lives.
And so it was close, but a win
is a win, and
we take it. And we're here in
New Hampshire
now ready for another contest in
just a few
days with a debate coming up.
And we're looking
forward to it. We have been to
New Hampshire
before.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: When you worked for
Barack Obama
in a similar role in 2008, you
went through
a slightly different outcome. He
won in Iowa,
but then he lost in New
Hampshire to Hillary
Clinton.
What did you learn from that
which informs
what you will do this time?
JOEL BENENSON: Well, I think,
you know what,
you learn is that -- and this is
the case
as you go through most of these
states -- is
that no two states are exactly
alike.
And you have to really focus in
on what's
unique in each state. New
Hampshire is a fiercely
independent state. You know, the
state's motto
is live free or die, very strong
anti-tax
sentiment, a wide-open primary
here. You know,
independents can walk in and
vote in either
the Democrat or the Republican
primary on
either day.
That's very different than that
caucus environment
on the Democratic side, where
you have to
show up at a specific time, you
caucus right
on the floor, and you're
competing for delegates
to the convention.
What's true here, though, is
folks are very
focused on their economic lives.
This is a
state that really appreciates
and values small
businesses and entrepreneurs.
And I think
that's why having a president
who can do all
parts of the job is going to be
important
to them. That's part of the
message that Hillary
Clinton is going to bring here,
because I
think folks in New Hampshire
know that that's
how you create good-paying jobs,
is investing
in small business, giving those
folks a chance
to export their goods, get the
loans they
need from the Export-Import
Bank.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Pardon me, Joel.
But you're running against
someone who is
leading way ahead of you in the
polls in New
Hampshire, in part by saying
he's the true
progressive. And she's lately
been saying,
I'm a progressive who can get
things done.
Are you really -- I just asked
about setting
expectations with Rick Tyler --
are you really
thinking it's possible to break
through that
bulwark which Bernie Sanders
seems to have
built for himself in New
Hampshire?
JOEL BENENSON: Well, you know,
he may have
mentioned it on their side of
the race, but
what we know historically is New
Englanders
do very, very well here. They
almost always
win when there isn't an
incumbent president
or vice president. I think there
is only one
time in about 40 years where
that didn't happen.
So, you know, we know we're
playing in his
backyard. He's from a state
right next door
west of New Hampshire, obviously
borders Vermont.
And he is showing that kind of
hometown strength.
So, we're playing on his home
field. We got
to win a road game here. We have
got a week
to go, and she's out campaigning
hard every
day. She's been all over the
state. Hillary
Clinton...
(CROSSTALK)
JOEL BENENSON: ... debates.
GWEN IFILL: Pardon me.
Will she be in South Carolina
between now
and New Hampshire primary night?
JOEL BENENSON: No.
I think, right now, we have got
a lot coming
up. We have a town hall
scheduled for tomorrow
night. We have got a debate on
Thursday. So
we're going to be focusing right
here, come
out of New Hampshire after the
primary. And
then we look forward to a period
after New
Hampshire to the end of March
where there
are more than 1,000 delegates
that are going
to be contested.
As you just mentioned, Gwen, you
go to Nevada,
South Carolina, then Super
Tuesday. So, you
will have over 1,000 delegates
that are going
to be decided in about a
six-week period.
And that's really going to be
kind of the
heart of the contest, I think.
GWEN IFILL: And we will be
following along
with you.
Joel Benenson, chief strategist
for Hillary
Clinton, thank you very much.
JOEL BENENSON: Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the past year,
ISIS has
gained a foothold in Libya,
expanding its
reach beyond its Middle Eastern
base, and
that's now a growing concern for
the U.S.
and its allies.
We begin with some background
from chief foreign
affairs correspondent, Margaret
Warner.
MARGARET WARNER: The coalition
fighting ISIS
can claim some progress in both
Iraq and Syria.
But now Libya, just 300 miles
from Italy,
has become a new magnet for the
militant group.
The threat was very much on the
minds of Secretary
of State John Kerry and
officials of 22 other
countries in Rome today.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: That
country has resources. The last
thing in the
world you want is a false
caliphate with access
to billions of dollars in oil
revenue.
MARGARET WARNER: Yet the
conference agreed
only to monitor developments.
U.S. military officials say some
3,000 ISIS
fighters have carved out
territory around
the coastal town of Sirte,
birthplace of the
late dictator Moammar Gadhafi.
From there,
the group mounts attacks on
civilian targets
and the country's oil
facilities. The U.S.
has already carried out
airstrikes in Libya,
killing a top ISIS commander
last November,
and ramped up reconnaissance
missions.
And in Washington today,
Secretary of Defense
Ash Carter called for a 50
percent spending
increase on the broader
anti-ISIS campaign.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: We
must also take into account in
our budget
that, as destructive power of
greater and
greater magnitude falls into the
hands of
smaller and smaller and more
aberrant groups
of people, countering terrorists
will likely
be a continuing part of the
future responsibilities.
MARGARET WARNER: Last month, the
chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
General Joseph
Dunford, said a decision on how
to expand
the U.S. role in Libya is
coming. The New
York Times quoted him as saying:
"It's fair
to say that we're looking to
take decisive
military actions In conjunction
with the political
process."
For now, Libya's political
process remains
in disarray. Since NATO
airstrikes helped
oust Gadhafi in 2011, the
country has been
torn by violence between warring
factions.
In December, the United Nations
helped broker
a new unity government between
the two main
rival groups. But they have
refused to carry
it out.
In Washington, I'm Margaret
Warner for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're joined now
by Frederic
Wehrey of the Middle East
Program at the Carnegie
Endowment for International
Peace. He was
most recently in Libya late last
year.
Welcome back to the program,
Fred Wehrey.
Remind us, why is Libya
important to the United
States?
FREDERIC WEHREY, Carnegie
Endowment for International
Peace: Well, its strategic
location. It sits
at the top of Africa. It has
access to the
Mediterranean and Europe. It has
oil reserves.
But, right now, it's perhaps a
fallback option
for the Islamic State. It's a
lawless place
where terrorists and smugglers
can take advantage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this
political vacuum that's
happened there, how did that
come about, very
quickly? I know there is a long
history there.
And what state is it in? I mean,
it sounds
pretty chaotic still.
FREDERIC WEHREY: Well, this is
really the
legacy partly of 42 years of
misrule from
Gadhafi. There were no
institutions. There
was no army, no police.
Since the fall of Gadhafi, you
have had a
political vacuum. You don't have
an army.
You don't have police. You have
militias,
basically, ruling the country.
So it's really
ripe -- a ripe environment for
ISIS to exploit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just how much
strength
do they have there?
FREDERIC WEHREY: They have got
anywhere from
about 3,000 to 5,000 fighters,
especially
in that crucial central city of
Sirte.
But the real fear is that more
fighters from
abroad could come in and bolster
their ranks
there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is the
U.S. goal?
What would the U.S. like to
accomplish?
FREDERIC WEHREY: Well, I think
they want to
prevent this from becoming a new
haven for
the Islamic State, to prevent
the Islamic
State from accessing oil
reserves, from disrupting
the formation of a new
government.
So they're going to try to
assist Libyan forces
on the ground. But the problem
is that there's
no central army. There is no
partner to work
with in that country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what are the
options, the
real options? Because we know
the U.S. has
been talking about doing
something. But nothing's
happened yet.
FREDERIC WEHREY: Well, they're
waiting for
this government to get its act
together, to
unify itself, so that there is a
central channel
to push aid and assistance
through.
If that doesn't happen, you can
expect the
U.S. and the Europeans to start
working with
these -- perhaps these
individual militias,
using special operations forces
and airstrikes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is there a
will on the
part of the Europeans to join in
with the
U.S. to do that?
FREDERIC WEHREY: We have seen
statements from
especially the British and the
French that
they are increasingly concerned
about the
Islamic State. Also, the
Italians have an
historic presence there. So,
they're gearing
up.
And that was part of Secretary
Kerry's mission
in Rome, was to unify the
Europeans and get
them on board with the U.S.
strategy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you mentioned
if the government
doesn't get its act together,
the U.S. can
work with some of the militias
on the ground.
But do you have a case like
Syria, where the
U.S. may not know who to trust,
who they can
work with?
FREDERIC WEHREY: This is a real
problem. And
this is why there are reports of
U.S. special
operations forces already on the
ground trying
to assess, who is a credible
partner, who
can we work with?
But it is very problematic. And
I think we're
really walking on a mine field
here in terms
of who do we actually give
assistance to and
could that further destabilize
the country
down the road?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you believe
the U.S. absolutely
has a commitment to go in there
and do something
about ISIS?
FREDERIC WEHREY: Well, we have
seen statements
like that.
I think they're poised to do
something. I
think first priority that they
see is resolving
the political impasse, resolving
these divisions,
because those divisions create
that vacuum
that ISIS is able to exploit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But does the
U.S., does the
West have the leverage to make
happen something
that it wants to have happen?
FREDERIC WEHREY: So, this is the
real problem.
The United Nations has been
involved.
I think you're seeing more and
more senior
level involvement from the
United States.
You have these statements from
Secretary Kerry,
from President Obama that really
signal to
the Libyans that we take this
very seriously.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what do you
expect in the
short term?
FREDERIC WEHREY: Well,
unfortunately, I'm
not optimistic.
I see more chaos. I see these
divisions. I
was just there. The divisions
are very stark.
They cannot agree on who is
going to command
the national level military. The
militias
still call the shots in the
streets. So it's
-- I think it's quite dire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sounds grim.
Frederic Wehrey of the Carnegie
Endowment
for International Peace, we
thank you.
FREDERIC WEHREY: Yes. My
pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
Oklahoma
became a national model for
early learning;
and previously unpublished
images documenting
black history are given new
life.
But, first, more on the
continuing debate
over police departments and the
disputed use
of force.
Yesterday, the Department of
Justice announced
it will review the conduct of
the San Francisco
Police Department. It comes
after the fatal
shooting of Mario Woods, a
26-year-old African-American
man, in December.
Police said Woods was
brandishing a knife
and less lethal methods had
failed to stop
him. But cell phone video has
cast doubt on
the police claims.
Our colleagues at public station
KQED cobbled
together two cell phone videos
taken of the
shooting, first in real time,
and then slowed
down.
A warning: This does contain
violent gunfire.
(GUNFIRE)
WOMAN: Oh, my God!
GWEN IFILL: Hari Sreenivasan has
more from
New York on the efforts to
change police departments
and behavior.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In San
Francisco's case,
the city voluntarily asked the
federal government
to do the review, but there have
been many
other investigations and
settlements with
the federal government that are
not undertaken
voluntarily.
"Frontline," along with The
Washington Post,
have looked at how those have
worked in cities
like Los Angeles and Detroit.
Sarah Childress is a digital
reporter for
"Frontline" who has worked on
this project,
including an in-depth
interactive called Fixing
the Force.
She joins us now from Boston.
So, Sarah, San Francisco's case
is a little
abnormal, in considering the
investigations
that you have launched, but --
because they're
doing this of their own accord.
SARAH CHILDRESS, "Frontline":
That's right.
This is actually a separate
process from what
the Justice Department calls its
pattern of
practice of investigations,
where they investigate
a department and then compel
them to implement
reforms. This is what -- it's
under a separate
office in the Justice
Department, and it's
called their collaborative
review process.
And they -- so the Justice
Department does
conduct investigation, a review,
but then
they recommend reforms, and it's
up to the
departments to decide whether or
how to implement
them. And that's what's
happening in San Francisco.
So, there will be no binding
agreement and
no -- the Justice Department
won't be able
to sue the department if they
don't actually
implement reforms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, we hear
about these
investigations oftentimes
because of very
high-profile abuse of force or
something that
kind of makes the news.
But, as you point out, these
investigations
have been going on for quite
some time.
SARAH CHILDRESS: That's right.
The Justice Department has been
investigating
police departments since 1994,
when they first
got the authority to do so. So
there's been
about 68 investigations in that
time. This
collaborative reform process,
though, is pretty
new. It's only been -- they
started it back
in 2011. And so there has only
been about
seven departments that have gone
through this
process.
And so it's difficult to tell
how it works.
Actually, only one department,
the Las Vegas
Metropolitan Police Department,
has actually
finished the entire reform
process under this
collaborative review process. So
it's difficult
to say how effective it will be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Given the
amount of time
and money the Justice Department
along with
the local police agencies are
spending, are
these plans working?
SARAH CHILDRESS: Well, it's a
great question.
And it's really hard to say. We
spent several
months investigating this with
The Washington
Post, and we found pretty mixed
results. In
a lot of cases, officers get
better training,
better equipment, and certainly
they become
more professional, but in terms
of actually
changing how those officers are
policing,
whether it's changing --
reducing use of force,
for example, reducing the amount
of time citizens
are filing complaints, that was
much more
difficult to tell.
Most of these agreements, when
they're court-enforced,
it's at least a five-year
process. I mean,
look, transforming a police
department takes
a lot of time. It's a lot of
money. And it's
a lot of effort. So you can't
just do these
things overnight.
And so I know that activists,
when they talk
about reforms, they want to see
progress right
away. And with these sorts of
long-term investigations
and reform process, that usually
isn't the
case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As you pointed
out, this
also not just takes time, but it
takes money.
And a lot of these things don't
exactly end
exactly at the end of year two
or year five.
So who foots the bill?
SARAH CHILDRESS: Well, it's up
to the cities.
And they're responsible for
paying for all
of these reforms.
There is a process by which they
can apply
for grants, and sometimes the
Justice Department
will provide technical
assistance or other
help, but it's really up to the
cities. You
know, and, in some cases, these
can cost millions,
especially with larger
departments. If you're
implementing new training, new
equipment,
hiring additional staffing, you
know, it's
-- in the case of Los Angeles,
which was one
of the longest-running reform
process, over
a decade, it cost an estimated
$300 million.
You know, that's a lot of money.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are there any
metrics that
measure outcomes? Is there less
abuse of force
after one of these
interventions?
SARAH CHILDRESS: Well, that's a
great question.
And that's one we actually tried
to answer
in our investigation with The
Washington Post.
And we came up with mixed
results. In some
cases, departments definitely
were using less
force. Officers were better
trained. And they
were -- departments were better
able to investigate
incidents, officer-involved
shootings.
But, in other cases, the data
was really mixed.
There isn't a national standard
on use of
force, so it's really difficult
to compare
a department to a department, or
even within
the department, once the Justice
Department
comes in and starts changing how
they report
use of force.
So the short answer is, it's
hard to say.
We really don't know yet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Sarah Childress
from "Frontline," thanks so much
for joining
us.
SARAH CHILDRESS: Thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's growing
interest in
a number of cities and states to
try funding
universal pre-kindergarten
programs.
Philadelphia is the latest city
that wants
to create one. Oklahoma has long
been home
to early childhood education
that's widely
cited as a model.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
reports on
how a liberal political priority
became popular
in a conservative state.
It's part of our education
series on Tuesdays,
Making the Grade.
STUDENTS: A is for apple, apple.
CAT WISE: In Oklahoma, the ABCs
start before
kindergarten.
STUDENTS: D is for dog.
CAT WISE: Children here begin
public education
at just 4 years of age, some as
young as 3.
It's preschool for anyone who
wants it, and
it costs the state about $7,500
per child
per year.
WOMAN: I like all those colors
you're using.
CAT WISE: The program is hailed
as a national
model by the Obama
administration and advocates
who believe early education
creates long-term
benefits.
WOMAN: What color is that one?
Very good.
CAT WISE: It's a costly
government program
in one of the reddest of red
states, but it
appears both Democrats and
Republicans believe
it's working.
WILLIAM GORMLEY, Georgetown
University: It's
not every day that a very
conservative state,
like Oklahoma, establishes a new
social program.
It's not every day that a very
poor state
like Oklahoma establishes a new
social program.
CAT WISE: William Gormley is a
professor of
public policy at Georgetown
University. He
has studied Oklahoma's
pre-kindergarten program
in Tulsa for 15 years.
WILLIAM GORMLEY: Students are
nine months
ahead of their peers in their
pre-reading
skills, seven months ahead of
their peers
in their pre-writing skills, and
five months
ahead of their peers in their
pre-math skills.
CAT WISE: Those differences were
obvious to
Lee Elementary School teacher
Patty Eaton
from the start.
PATTY EATON, Teacher, Lee
Elementary School:
Their skill level was quite a
bit above the
other children that were coming
in without
the pre-K program. It was pretty
incredible
to see the difference between
the two.
Tulsa resident Coral Renteria
(ph) says her
4-year-old daughter, Lindsey
(ph), is thriving.
WOMAN: She's only been in pre-K
for about
two months, and she's singing
everything,
like her ABCs.
CAT WISE: And what are the songs
you sing?
CHILD (singing): A, B, C, D, E,
F, G.
WILLIAM GORMLEY: At kindergarten
entry in
Tulsa, the single best predictor
of a child's
verbal test skills is not race,
or income,
but whether that child was in
pre-K the previous
year.
CAT WISE: While the research
shows early gains
for children here in Oklahoma,
the big question
is, will those gains persist in
later years?
Critics of Oklahoma's program
say the costs
of pre-kindergarten outstrip
long-term benefits,
which remain unclear.
LISA SNELL, Reason Foundation:
There's some
positive outcomes for the kids,
but then,
by second grade, third grade,
those fade out.
CAT WISE: Lisa Snell is an
education analyst
at the Reason Foundation, a
libertarian think
tank.
LISA SNELL: If you're talking
about things
like graduation rates, test
scores, college
graduation, the economic future
of these kids,
I think we have a more difficult
time linking
the investment in early
education to long-term
outcomes.
CAT WISE: Snell points to
Oklahoma's fourth
grade reading scores, which have
remained
stagnant since universal pre-K
was introduced.
LISA SNELL: So far, they have
had a pretty
mediocre response at best in
terms of the
progress that their kids are
making later
in school.
CAT WISE: But advocates for
Oklahoma's pre-K
program say looking at test
score trends can
be misleading, since Oklahoma
has seen a recent
influx of children who speak
English as a
second language.
Principal Raye Nero of Tulsa's
Sequoyah Elementary
School says more students are
showing up at
school less prepared.
RAYE NERO, Principal, Sequoyah
Elementary
School: My demographics are very
challenging.
I have parents who have an
elementary education
raising their kids. So, our kids
are not learning
at home like they should.
So, not only are we teachers.
We're parents.
We're teaching social skills.
We're teaching
emotional skills. We're teaching
academic
skills. So it's difficult.
CAT WISE: And those students who
are in pre-K,
they're seeing gains, but
there's a lot to
make up for, I guess.
RAYE NERO: A lot, but I still
believe, the
earlier we get those kids, and
can put them
in this kind of structure, will
help them
in the long run.
CAT WISE: It falls on pre-K
teachers like
Kegan Waters (ph) to bridge that
learning
gap.
WOMAN: Four kids in my class out
of 20 are
speaking only Spanish when they
walk in the
door.
CAT WISE: Lindsey, Coral
Renteria's daughter,
was one of them.
WOMAN: Her first language is
Spanish. In two
months, she's caught up on her
English like
I couldn't imagine.
CAT WISE: In just two months?
WOMAN: In just two months. I'm
very, very
happy.
CAT WISE: Across the country, 44
states pay
for some version of pre-K
classes, but only
four states and the district of
Columbia offer
universal preschool. The fact
that all residents,
not just families with low
income, can enroll
here could be why the program
receives wide
political support in a
conservative state
like Oklahoma.
DAVID BLATT, Executive Director,
Oklahoma
Policy Institute: Whether you're
talking about
urban areas or rural areas or
suburban areas
where you have middle-class
families that
tend to get out and vote, we
have come to
expect that there's going to be
a 4-year-old
program there.
CAT WISE: David Blatt is the
executive director
of the Oklahoma Policy
Institute.
DAVID BLATT: Nobody has decided
to go out
to their constituents and say,
we're going
to do away with this free early
childhood
program that you have been
counting on.
CAT WISE: Take Jennifer
Doverspike. She's
a Tulsa mother who entered her
4-year-old
daughter Lucy (ph) in her
neighborhood pre-K
program.
JENNIFER DOVERSPIKE, Mother: And
I'm very
proud of it, as a Tulsan and as
an Oklahoman,
to have a program like this
that's so great.
CAT WISE: Doverspike loves the
high-quality
instruction. Oklahoma pre-K
teachers must
have a college degree, an early
education
certificate, and they are paid
the same salary
as all K-12 teachers.
JENNIFER DOVERSPIKE: As a
parent, I am thrilled
that this program exists, but a
preschool
is more beneficial to
disadvantaged children.
And if it wasn't the amount of
money we're
spending on the program -- where
can that
money go to best serve our
citizens? And the
money is best served for
children who truly
need preschool. A parent like me
taking advantage
of the program is a parent that
could have
been sending her child to a
different preschool
and spending money on it, and is
now taking
advantage of this because it's
free.
CAT WISE: For his part,
Professor Gormley
continues to compare outcomes of
the 2006
pre-K and non-pre-K students who
are now in
Tulsa's ninth grade.
WILLIAM GORMLEY: Do they differ
in their letter
grades? Do they differ in their
standardized
test scores? Do they differ in
their behavior?
Are there more suspensions if
the kids were
not in pre-K? Is there more
absenteeism if
the kids were not in pre-K?
All of these factors have been
shown to be
really important in determining
future success
in school, future success at
work, and future
success in life.
CAT WISE: Seventy-five percent
of families
here enroll their children in
pre-kindergarten.
Some cities, including Denver,
Seattle, and
New York, have recently put in
place Oklahoma's
universal model, while a number
of states
have chosen to increase funding
for low-income
pre-K.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Tulsa,
Oklahoma.
GWEN IFILL: Now: digging through
an archive
of previously unpublished photos
that help
fill in a portrait of
African-American history.
Again to Hari in New York.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The archives
come from The
New York Times and include
hundreds of images
taken from old negatives.
Some of the pictures capture a
historic moment,
like this one taken inside
Malcolm X's house
in Queens after it was
firebombed. Some include
well-known figures like
Run-D.M.C., or this
one of Lena Horne that was taken
inside her
apartment for a profile of her,
but it turned
out there was a backstory. As
famous as she
was at the time, she still could
not get anyone
to sell her a co-op without the
help of Harry
Belafonte.
Others feature important events
like school
integration.
Rachel Swarns is part of the
team unpacking
the project and asking why they
went unestablished.
She joins me now from The New
York Times newsroom.
How did you embark on this? The
New York Times
archive must have hundreds of
thousands of
photos that never made the cut.
RACHEL SWARNS, The New York
Times: It is,
as you can imagine, quite a dive
into history.
Our archives, which is known as
the morgue,
has about five million pictures,
about 300
stacks of negatives. We truly
didn't know
what we were going to find when
we were going
in, but we thought it would be
pretty fascinating.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's this
-- most of
these photos that you're
publishing now never
have seen the light of day, so
to speak.
There is one that almost anybody
will recognize.
It's the portrait of Dr. King.
But, really,
it wasn't just taken as a
portrait. Tell us
the story behind that.
RACHEL SWARNS: Well, what we
really wanted
to do was look at photos that
just had never
appeared before.
And the photo of Dr. King is
fascinating because
the one that our readers have
seen over and
over and over again looks like
it was shot
in a studio, but, really, it was
a roundtable.
He was doing a television
interview. And that
photo actually never even
appeared in The
New York Times, because the
story that day
ended up being about protesters
throwing eggs
at Dr. King. And we didn't have
that photo.
So, some time later, a photo
editor cropped
that photo and made the photo
that so many
of our readers have seen over
the decades,
but it was never a formal studio
sitting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
that photo is
probably something that I saw
from high school
textbooks onward.
So, you have another photo that
you recently
published of Jackie Robinson
giving a talk.
What's the story behind that?
RACHEL SWARNS: Part of the great
thing about
this project is that we are
unveiling unpublished
photos, but we really want to
engage in a
conversation with our readers.
So, this is a mystery. We had
this photo of
Jackie Robinson speaking at City
College,
but there was never a story, and
we have no
idea what exactly he was doing
or what exactly
he was talking about. So, we
posted the photo,
which is a lovely photo, and
then we asked
our readers: Were you there? Do
you know someone
who was there? Is there anyone
who can tell
us about this story behind this
photo?
And within a couple of hours, we
actually
got a response. We were still
digging for
more anecdotes and for people
who are actually
in that photo. But, you know,
readers are
really responding.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what
happened? The readers
turn in there, are saying, hey,
this is a
photo from this year? And then
you pick up
the story from there.
RACHEL SWARNS: That's exactly
right. It was
from 1949.
We shared what we knew. And,
almost immediately,
people started writing in. And
what we have
found so far is an article from
1949 from
the undergraduate newspaper at
City College,
and it describes a little bit
about what Jackie
Robinson was doing. And he was
talking about
his work with underprivileged
kids at the
HARLEM YMCA.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What are the
reasons that
these published -- or these
photos went unpublished?
They were great photographs in
some cases.
The photographers were sent out
there on assignments.
Clearly, someone commissioned
these to be
taken. Then why didn't they make
the papers?
RACHEL SWARNS: You know, there
are a number
of reasons why photos doesn't go
-- published.
And the truth is, we won't know
the whole
story behind them. But, you
know, one of the
things we discovered as we were
digging through
the archives is that, as
powerful as the photos
we're showing to readers, as
powerful as they
are, what is almost as powerful
is the photos
that we cannot find.
The whole question of who was
shot and who
was not is a real one. And the
photos that
are missing, that's a big
question. And there
are reasons why some of these
people are not
in our archives. And we didn't
have a whole
huge staff of photographers at
the time.
You know, the newspaper didn't
put a premium
on images, like it does today.
We were called
the gray lady because we put a
premium on
words, lots of them. But we have
also really
got to be frank and honest and
acknowledge
that this was a time period when
African-Americans
were marginalized in society and
in media.
And some of the holes that we
discovered,
we could not find a single staff
photograph
of WEB Du Bois, the scholar and
intellectual,
of Richard Wright, the writer,
Romare Bearden,
the painter, and we think that
some of those
holes likely have to do with the
biases of
some of our editors at the time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Rachel Swarns
of The New York Times, thanks so
much.
RACHEL SWARNS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Being
a morning person seems to come
naturally to
some, but why? A new study from
the genomics
company 23andMe attempts to
answer this through
a genetic survey of nearly
90,000 people.
You can see what they found on
our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday: the rise of
right-wing extremism
in Sweden, after the country
embraced more
than 160,000 refugees only last
year.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.